# CodeBook.md

Getting and Cleaning Data Course Project
The purpose of this project is to demonstrate the ability to collect, work with, and clean a data set. The goal is to prepare tidy data that can be used for later analysis.
Data Set Information:
The experiments have been carried out with a group of 30 volunteers within an age bracket of 19-48 years. Each person performed six activities (WALKING, WALKING_UPSTAIRS, WALKING_DOWNSTAIRS, SITTING, STANDING, LAYING) wearing a smartphone (Samsung Galaxy S II) on the waist. Using its embedded accelerometer and gyroscope, we captured 3-axial linear acceleration and 3-axial angular velocity at a constant rate of 50Hz. The experiments have been video-recorded to label the data manually. The obtained dataset has been randomly partitioned into two sets, where 70% of the volunteers was selected for generating the training data and 30% the test data. 
The sensor signals (accelerometer and gyroscope) were pre-processed by applying noise filters and then sampled in fixed-width sliding windows of 2.56 sec and 50% overlap (128 readings/window). The sensor acceleration signal, which has gravitational and body motion components, was separated using a Butterworth low-pass filter into body acceleration and gravity. The gravitational force is assumed to have only low frequency components, therefore a filter with 0.3 Hz cutoff frequency was used. From each window, a vector of features was obtained by calculating variables from the time and frequency domain.
The original files are available here: https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip- 'features_info.txt': Shows information about the variables used on the feature vector.- 'features.txt': List of all features.- 'activity_labels.txt': Links the class labels with their activity name.- 'train/X_train.txt': Training set.- 'train/y_train.txt': Training labels.- 'test/X_test.txt': Test set.- 'test/y_test.txt': Test labels.The following files are available for the train and test data. Their descriptions are equivalent. - 'train/subject_train.txt': Each row identifies the subject who performed the activity for each window sample. Its range is from 1 to 30. - 'train/Inertial Signals/total_acc_x_train.txt': The acceleration signal from the smartphone accelerometer X axis in standard gravity units 'g'. Every row shows a 128 element vector. The same description applies for the 'total_acc_x_train.txt' and 'total_acc_z_train.txt' files for the Y and Z axis. - 'train/Inertial Signals/body_acc_x_train.txt': The body acceleration signal obtained by subtracting the gravity from the total acceleration. - 'train/Inertial Signals/body_gyro_x_train.txt': The angular velocity vector measured by the gyroscope for each window sample. The units are radians/second. 
Notes: ======- Features are normalized and bounded within [-1,1].- Each feature vector is a row on the text file.
## 1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set:# Read in the datafeatures     = read.table('./features.txt',header=FALSE); #imports features.txtactivityType = read.table('./activity_labels.txt',header=FALSE); #imports activity_labels.txtxTrain       = read.table('./train/x_train.txt',header=FALSE); #imports x_train.txtyTrain       = read.table('./train/y_train.txt',header=FALSE); #imports y_train.txtsubjectTrain = read.table('./train/subject_train.txt',header=FALSE); #imports subject_train.txtxTest        = read.table('./test/x_test.txt',header=FALSE); #imports x_test.txtyTest        = read.table('./test/y_test.txt',header=FALSE); #imports y_test.txtsubjectTest  = read.table('./test/subject_test.txt',header=FALSE); #imports subject_test.txt
# Assign column names colnames(activityType)  = c('activityId','activityType')colnames(yTrain)        = "activityId"colnames(xTrain)        = features[,2] colnames(subjectTrain)  = "subjectId"colnames(yTest)       = "activityId"colnames(xTest)       = features[,2]colnames(subjectTest) = "subjectId"
# Merges the training and the test sets to create one data settrainingData = cbind(yTrain,subjectTrain,xTrain)testData = cbind(yTest,subjectTest,xTest)
# Combine training and testData = rbind(trainingData,testData)
## 2. Extracts the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement:colNames = colnames(Data) 
Vector = (grepl("activity..",colNames) | grepl("subject..",colNames)                 | grepl("-mean..",colNames) & !grepl("-meanFreq..",colNames) &                         !grepl("mean..-",colNames) | grepl("-std..",colNames) &                          !grepl("-std()..-",colNames))
# Subset Data table based on the logicalVector to keep only desired columnsData = Data[Vector==TRUE]
# Merge the Data set with the actitivityType table to include descriptive activity namesData = merge(Data,activityType,by='activityId',all.x=TRUE)
# Updating the colNames vector to include the new column names after mergecolNames  = colnames(finalData) 
# Assigning the descriptive column names to the Data setcolnames(Data) = colNames
# Create a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable #for each activity and each subject. 
# Create a new table without the activityType columnActivityType  = Data[,names(Data) != 'activityType']
# Summarizing table for the mean of each variable for activity and subjecttdata = aggregate(ActivityType[,names(ActivityType)                 != c('activityId','subjectId')],                by=list(activityId=ActivityType$activityId,subjectId =                 ActivityType$subjectId),mean)
## 3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set:# Assigning the descriptive column names to the Data setcolnames(Data) = colNames
## 4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive activity names:
# 5. Create a 2nd, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject:# Create a new table without the activityType columnActivityType  = Data[,names(Data) != 'activityType']
# Summarizing table for the mean of each variable for activity and subjecttdata = aggregate(ActivityType[,names(ActivityType)                 != c('activityId','subjectId')],                by=list(activityId=ActivityType$activityId,subjectId =                 ActivityType$subjectId),mean)
# Merging the data with activityType tdata = merge(tdata,activityType,by='activityId',all.x=TRUE)
# Export the Data set write.table(tdata, './tdsavg.txt',sep='\t',row.names=FALSE)
